Version 4.1.2
=============

Release Date: May 16, 2021

**4.1.2 release of CodeIgniter4**

BREAKING:

Fixed `a bug <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/issues/4116>`_ in ``current_url()`` that prevented
configurations with an ``indexPage`` from including that value in the return value. Any installations
using ``App::$indexPage`` should expect altered values from ``current_url()`` and all its dependencies
(including Response Testing, Pager, Form Helper, Pager, and View Parser).

Enhancements:

- New HTTP classes, ``Cookie`` and ``CookieStore``, for abstracting web cookies.
- New ``assertRedirectTo()`` assertion available for HTTP tests.
- New logger handler, ``ErrorlogHandler``, that writes to ``error_log()``.
- Entity. Added custom type casting functionality.
- New option in routing. The ``priority`` option lower the priority of specific route processing.
- The ``Autoloader`` class can now load files which do not contain PHP classes. The list of `non-class` files will be listed in the ``$files`` property of ``Config\Autoload`` class.

Changes:

- Layouts in views now support nested sections.
- ``Response::getCookie`` now returns a ``Cookie`` instance instead of an array of cookie attributes.
- ``Response::getCookies`` now returns an array of ``Cookie`` instances instead of array of array of attributes.
- To eliminate warnings from modern browsers' consoles, empty samesite values will be defaulted to ``Lax`` on cookie dispatch.
- `Model::errors()` and `BaseModel::errors()` now always returns `array`; there was no definition change but the docblock has been updated.
- ``Entity::castAs`` has changed behavior. Added new parameter ``$method``. Type casting has been moved to separate handlers.
- Entity. Timestamp casting now throws an exception when an invalid value is passed
- ``Entity::castAsJson`` uses external cast handler ``JsonCast::get``.
- ``Entity::mutateDate`` uses external cast handler ``DatetimeCast::get``.
- In order for ``Config\**`` classes to get their respective properties' values from the ``.env``, it is now necessary to namespace the property with the name of the class. Previously, the property names are enough but now disallowed because it can get system environment variables, like ``PATH``.
- The array helper ``_array_search_dot`` is now marked for ``@internal`` use. As this is used by ``dot_array_search``, users should not use ``_array_search_dot`` directly in their code.
- ``CacheInterface::getMetaData()`` returns ``null`` for misses, or an array with at least the "expires" key set to the absolute epoch expiration, or ``null`` for "never expires". The File, Memcached, and Wincache Handlers still return ``false`` which will become ``null`` in a future release.

Deprecations:

- Deprecated ``Codeigniter\View\View::$currentSection`` property.
- Language strings and exceptions on invalid cookie samesite are deprecated for the ``CookieException``'s own exception message.
- Deprecated `CodeIgniter\Entity` in favor of `CodeIgniter\Entity\Entity`
- Deprecated cookie-related properties of ``Response`` in order to use the ``Cookie`` class.
- Deprecated cookie-related properties of ``Security`` in order to use the ``Cookie`` class.
- Deprecated cookie-related properties of ``Session`` in order to use the ``Cookie`` class.
- Deprecated ``Security::isExpired()`` to use the ``Cookie``'s internal expires status.
- Deprecated ``CIDatabaseTestCase`` to use the ``DatabaseTestTrait`` instead.
- Deprecated ``FeatureTestCase`` to use the ``FeatureTestTrait`` instead.
- Deprecated ``ControllerTester`` to use the ``ControllerTestTrait`` instead.
- Consolidated and deprecated ``ControllerResponse`` and ``FeatureResponse`` in favor of ``TestResponse``.
- Deprecated ``Time::instance()``, use ``Time::createFromInstance()`` instead (now accepts ``DateTimeInterface``).
- Deprecated ``IncomingRequest::removeRelativeDirectory()``, use ``URI::removeDotSegments()`` instead
- Deprecated ``\API\ResponseTrait::failValidationError`` to use ``\API\ResponseTrait::failValidationErrors`` instead

Bugs Fixed:

*See the repo's **CHANGELOG.MD** for a complete list of bugs fixed.*

- ``BaseConnection::query()`` now returns ``false`` for failed queries (unless ``DBDebug==true``, in which case an exception will be thrown) and returns boolean values for write-type queries as specified in the docs.
