Version 4.3.5
#############

Release Date: May 21, 2023

**4.3.5 release of CodeIgniter4**

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3

SECURITY
********

- *Remote Code Execution Vulnerability in Validation Placeholders* was fixed.
  See the `Security advisory GHSA-m6m8-6gq8-c9fj <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/security/advisories/GHSA-m6m8-6gq8-c9fj>`_
  for more information.
- Fixed that ``Session::stop()`` did not destroy the session.
  See :ref:`Session Library <session-stop>` for details.

Changes
*******

- **make:cell command:** When creating a new cell, the controller would always have the ``Cell`` suffixed to the class name.
  For the view file, the final ``_cell`` is always removed.
- **View Cells:** For compatibility with previous versions, view filenames ending with ``_cell`` can still be
  located by the ``Cell`` as long as auto-detection of view file is enabled (via setting the ``$view`` property
  to an empty string).

Deprecations
************

- **Session:** The :ref:`Session::stop() <session-stop>` method is deprecated.
  Use the :ref:`Session::destroy() <session-destroy>` instead.

Bugs Fixed
**********

- **Validation:** Fixed a bug where a closure used in combination with ``permit_empty`` or ``if_exist`` rules was causing an error.
- **make:cell command:** Fixed generating view files as classes.
- **make:cell command:** Fixed treatment of single word class input for case-insensitive OS.

See the repo's
`CHANGELOG.md <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a complete list of bugs fixed.
