Version 4.3.4
#############

Release Date: April 27, 2023

**4.3.4 release of CodeIgniter4**

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3

BREAKING
********

Behavior Changes
================

.. _v434-redirect-status-code:

Redirect Status Code
--------------------

- Due to a bug, in previous versions, when using HTTP/1.1 or later the status
  code of the actual redirect response might be changed even if a status code was
  specified. For example, for a GET request, 302 would change to 307; for a POST
  request, 307 and 302 would change to 303.
- Starting with this version, if you specify a status code in
  :ref:`redirect <response-redirect-status-code>`, that code will always be used
  in the response.
- The default code for GET requests has been corrected from 307 to 302 when using
  HTTP/1.1 or later.
- The default code for HEAD and OPTIONS requests has been corrected from 303 to
  307 when using HTTP/1.1 or later.
- In ``$routes->addRedirect()``, 302 is specified by default. Therefor 302 will
  always be used when you don't specify a status code. In previous versions,
  302 might be changed.

.. _v434-forge-modifycolumn:

Forge::modifyColumn()
---------------------

- The :ref:`$forge->modifyColumn() <db-forge-modifyColumn>` has been fixed. Due
  to a bug, in previous versions, SQLite3/Postgres/SQLSRV might change
  ``NULL``/``NOT NULL`` unpredictably.
- In previous versions, the OCI8 driver did not change ``NULL``/``NOT NULL``
  when you don't specify the ``null`` key.
- Now in all database drivers ``$forge->modifyColumn()`` always sets ``NULL``
  when you don't specify the ``null`` key.
- The ``NULL``/``NOT NULL`` change may still be unexpectedly, it is recommended
  to always specify the ``null`` key.

Deprecations
************

- **Text Helper:** :php:func:`random_string()`'s type ``basic``, ``md5``, and
  ``sha1`` are deprecated. They are not cryptographically secure.

Bugs Fixed
**********

- **CURLRequest:** Fixed a bug where the response class was shared between requests.

See the repo's
`CHANGELOG.md <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a complete list of bugs fixed.
