Version 4.3.6
#############

Release Date: June 18, 2023

**4.3.6 release of CodeIgniter4**

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3

BREAKING
********

Interface Changes
=================

.. note:: As long as you have not extended the relevant CodeIgniter core classes
    or implemented these interfaces, all these changes are backward compatible
    and require no intervention.

AutoRouterInterface
-------------------

Now ``AutoRouterInterface::getRoute()`` has the new second parameter ``string $httpVerb``.

ValidationInterface::check()
----------------------------

- The second parameter has changed from ``string $rule`` to ``$rules``.
- The optional fourth parameter ``$dbGroup = null`` has been added.

Method Signature Changes
========================

Validation::check()
-------------------

- The second parameter has changed from ``string $rule`` to ``$rules``.
- The optional fourth parameter ``$dbGroup = null`` has been added.

Deprecations
************

- **AutoRouterImproved:** The constructor parameter ``$httpVerb`` is deprecated.
  No longer used.

Bugs Fixed
**********

- **Validation:** Fixed a bug that ``$DBGroup`` is ignored when checking
  the value of a placeholder.
- **Validation:** Fixed a bug that ``check()`` cannot specify non-default
  database group.
- **Database:** Fixed a bug where semicolon character (``;``) in one of the Postgre connection parameters would break the DSN string.
- **AutoRouting Improved:** Fixed a bug that feature testing may not find
  controller/method.

See the repo's
`CHANGELOG.md <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a complete list of bugs fixed.
