#############
Version 4.4.4
#############

Release Date: December 28, 2023

**4.4.4 release of CodeIgniter4**

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3

********
BREAKING
********

Validation with Dot Array Syntax
================================

A validation rule with the wildcard ``*`` now validates only data in correct
dimensions as "dot array syntax".
See :ref:`Upgrading <upgrade-444-validation-with-dot-array-syntax>` for details.

Validation rules matches and differs
====================================

Bugs have been fixed in the case where ``matches`` and ``differs`` in the Strict
and Traditional rules validate data of non-string types.

The use of the `ssl_key` option in CURLRequest was removed
==========================================================

Due to a bug, we were using the undocumented `ssl_key` config option to define the CA bundle in CURLRequest.
This was fixed and is now working according to documentation. You can define your CA bundle via the `verify` option.

Filesystem Helper
=================

:php:func:`get_filenames()` now follows symlink folders, which it previously just returned
without following.

************
Enhancements
************

- Full support for PHP 8.3.

***************
Message Changes
***************

- Added ``HTTP.invalidJSON`` error message.
- Added ``HTTP.unsupportedJSONFormat`` error message.

************
Deprecations
************

- **Request:** The :php:meth:`CodeIgniter\\HTTP\\Request::getEnv()` method is
  deprecated. This method does not work from the beginning. Use :php:func:`env()`
  instead.

**********
Bugs Fixed
**********

- **CURLRequest:** Fixed a bug where the hostname was checked even if options 'verify' was set to *false*.

See the repo's
`CHANGELOG.md <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a complete list of bugs fixed.
