#############
Version 4.5.0
#############

Release Date: April 7, 2024

**4.5.0 release of CodeIgniter4**

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3

**********
Highlights
**********

- Update minimal PHP requirement to 8.1.
- Update minimal PHPUnit requirement to 10.5.
- **CORS filter** (*contributed by* `kenjis <https://github.com/kenjis>`_)
  See :doc:`../libraries/cors`.
- The **spark optimize** command for performance improvement on production
  environment (*contributed by* `kenjis <https://github.com/kenjis>`_).
  See :ref:`spark_optimize`.

************
Enhancements
************

.. _v450-required-filters:

Required Filters
================

New :ref:`Required Filters <filters-required>` have been introduced. They are
special filters that are applied before and after other kinds of filters, and
always applied even if a route does not exist.

The following existing functionalities have been reimplemented as Required Filters.

- :ref:`Force Global Secure Requests <forcehttps>`
- :doc:`../general/caching`
- :ref:`performancemetrics`
- :ref:`the-debug-toolbar`

The Benchmark **Timers** used by Debug Toolbar now collect *Required Before Filters*
and *Required After Filters* data.

The benchmark points have been changed:

- Before

   - ``bootstrap``: Creating Request and Response objects, Event ``pre_system``, Instantiating RouteCollection object, Loading Routes files, Instantiating Router object,
   - ``routing``: Routing,
- After

   - ``bootstrap``: Creating Request and Response objects, Event ``pre_system``.
   - ``required_before_filters``: Instantiating Filters object, Running *Required Before Filters*.
   - ``routing``: Instantiating RouteCollection object, Loading Routes files, Instantiating Router object, Routing,

Routing
=======

- **AutoRouting Improved:** The ``$translateUriToCamelCase`` option has been added
  that allows using CamelCase controller and method names. See
  :ref:`controller-translate-uri-to-camelcase`.
- **Others:**
    - Added option ``$multipleSegmentsOneParam``. When this option is
      enabled, a placeholder that matches multiple segments, such as ``(:any)``, will
      be passed directly as it is to one parameter, even if it contains multiple segments.
      See :ref:`multiple-uri-segments-as-one-parameter` for details.
    - Now the 404 controller's method that you set in ``$override404`` also receive
      a ``PageNotFoundException`` message as the first parameter.
    - Now you can use the ``__invoke()`` method as the default method. See
      :ref:`routing-default-method`.

Commands
========

- Added ``spark optimize`` command to optimize configuration for production environment.
  See :ref:`spark_optimize` for the details.
- Added ``spark make:test`` command to generate a skeleton test file. See
  :ref:`cli-generators-make-test` for the details.
- Added ``spark config:check`` command to check Config values. See
  :ref:`confirming-config-values` for the details.
- Added ``spark phpini:check`` command to check important PHP ini settings. See
  :ref:`spark-phpini-check` for the details.
- Added ``spark lang:find`` command to update translations keys. See :ref:`generating-translation-files-via-command` for the details.
- The ``--dbgroup`` option has been added to the ``spark db:table`` command.
  See :ref:`Database Commands <db-command-specify-the-dbgroup>`.

Testing
=======

- **DomParser:** The new methods were added ``seeXPath()`` and ``dontSeeXPath()``
  which allows users to work directly with DOMXPath object, using complex expressions.
- **CLI:** The new ``InputOutput`` class was added and now you can write tests
  for commands more easily if you use ``MockInputOutput``.
  See :ref:`using-mock-input-output`.
- **Fabricator:** The Fabricator class now has the ``setUnique()``, ``setOptional()`` and ``setValid()``
  methods to allow calling of Faker's modifiers on each field before faking their values.
- **TestResponse:** TestResponse no longer extends ``PHPUnit\Framework\TestCase`` as it
  is not a test. Assertions' return types are now natively typed ``void``.

Database
========

Query Builder
-------------

.. _v450-query-builder-limit-0-behavior:

limit(0) Behavior
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Added a feature flag ``Feature::$limitZeroAsAll`` to fix the incorrect behavior
  of ``limit(0)``.
- If ``LIMIT 0`` is specified in a SQL statement, 0 records are returned. However,
  there is a bug in the Query Builder, and if ``limit(0)`` is specified, the
  generated SQL statement will have no ``LIMIT`` clause and all records will be
  returned.
- It is recommended that ``$limitZeroAsAll`` in **app/Config/Feature.php** be set
  to ``false`` as this incorrect behavior will be fixed in a future version. See
  also :ref:`v450-model-findall-limit-0-behavior`.

Others
------

- Added support for database names containing dots (``.``).

Model
=====

Model Field Casting
-------------------

Added a feature to convert data retrieved from a database into the appropriate
PHP type. See :ref:`model-field-casting` for details.

.. _v450-model-findall-limit-0-behavior:

findAll(0) Behavior
-------------------

- Added a feature flag ``Feature::$limitZeroAsAll`` to fix the incorrect behavior
  of ``limit(0)`` for Query Builder. See :ref:`v450-query-builder-limit-0-behavior`
  for details.
- If you disable this flag, you need to change code like ``findAll(0, $offset)``
  to ``findAll(null, $offset)``.

$updateOnlyChanged
------------------

Added a property ``$updateOnlyChanged`` whether to update
:doc:`Entity <../models/entities>`'s only changed fields. If you set this property
to ``false``, when you are updating an Entity, ``DataException``
"There is no data to update" will not raise even if the values in the Entity have
not changed.

See :ref:`Using CodeIgniter’s Model <model-update-only-changed>` for details.

Saving Dates
------------

Now you can configure the date/time format when you save :doc:`Time <../libraries/time>`
instances. See :ref:`model-saving-dates` for details.

Libraries
=========

- **CORS:** Added :doc:`../libraries/cors` filter and class.
- **Validation:**
    - Added the new rule ``field_exists`` that checks the filed exists in the
      data to be validated.
    - The ``$dbGroup`` parameter of ``Validation::run()`` now accepts not only
      a database group name, but also a database connection instance or an array
      of database settings.
- **Session:**
    - ``RedisHandler`` now can configure the interval time for acquiring locks
      (``$lockRetryInterval``) and the number of retries (``$lockMaxRetries``).
    - Now you can use Redis ACL (username and password) with ``RedisHandler``.
      See :ref:`sessions-redishandler-driver` for details.
- **Security:** ``Config\Security::$redirect`` is now, by default, environment-specific.
  For production environment, changed to ``true`` but is still ``false`` for other
  environments.

Others
======

- **Bootstrap:** The ``CodeIgniter\Boot`` class has been introduced, replacing
  **system/bootstrap.php**.
- **Autoloader:**
    - Autoloading performance when using Composer has been improved.
      Adding the ``App`` namespace in the ``autoload.psr4`` setting in **composer.json**
      may also improve the performance of your app. See :ref:`autoloader-application-namespace`.
    - FileLocator Caching implemented. See :ref:`file-locator-caching` for details.
    - ``FileLocatorInterface`` has been added.
- **CodeIgniter:** Added a pseudo-variable ``{memory_usage}`` to show your memory
  usage in your view files, which was supported by CodeIgniter 3.
- **Events:** Added event points ``pre_command`` and ``post_command`` for Spark
  commands. See :ref:`Event Points <event-points-for-cli-apps>`.
- **HTTP:** Added ``Message::addHeader()`` method to add another header with
  the same name. See :php:meth:`CodeIgniter\\HTTP\\Message::addHeader()`.
- **Web Page Caching:** ``ResponseCache`` has been improved to include the request
  HTTP method in the cache key. This means that the same URI will be cached separately
  if the HTTP method is different.
- **CSP:** Added ``ContentSecurityPolicy::clearDirective()`` method to clear
  existing CSP directives. See :ref:`csp-clear-directives`.

********
BREAKING
********

Behavior Changes
================

Lowercase HTTP Method Name
--------------------------

For historical reasons, the framework used HTTP method names in lower case like
"get", "post".
But the method token is case-sensitive because it might be used as a gateway
to object-based systems with case-sensitive method names. By convention,
standardized methods are defined in all-uppercase US-ASCII letters.
See https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#name-overview.

Now the framework uses the correct HTTP method names like "GET", "POST".

- ``Request::getMethod()`` returns uppercase HTTP methods.
- ``CURLRequest::request()`` does not change the accepted HTTP methods to uppercase.

See :ref:`upgrade-450-lowercase-http-method-name` for details.

Filter Execution Order
----------------------

The order in which Controller Filters are executed has changed. See
:ref:`Upgrading Guide <upgrade-450-filter-execution-order>` for details.

Nested Route Groups and Options
-------------------------------

Due to a bug fix, the behavior has changed so that options passed to the outer
``group()`` are merged with the options of the inner ``group()``.
See :ref:`Upgrading Guide <upgrade-450-nested-route-groups-and-options>` for details.

API\\ResponseTrait
------------------

Now when a response format is JSON, if you pass string data, the framework returns
a JSON response. In previous versions, it returned a HTML response.
See :ref:`Upgrading Guide <upgrade-450-api-response-trait>` for details.

Factories class
---------------

:doc:`../concepts/factories` has been changed to a final class. It is a static
class, and even if it were extended, there is no way to replace it.

Others
------

- **AutoRouting Legacy:** Changed so that a ``PageNotFoundException`` is thrown
  if the controller corresponding to the request URI does not exist.
- **Logger:** The :php:func:`log_message()` function and the logger methods in
  ``CodeIgniter\Log\Logger`` now do not return ``bool`` values. The return types
  have been fixed to ``void`` to follow the PSR-3 interface.
- **Autoloader:** The prefix ``\`` in the fully qualified classname returned by
  ``FileLocator::findQualifiedNameFromPath()`` has been removed.
- **BaseModel:** The ``getIdValue()`` method has been changed to ``abstract``.
- **Routing:** The :ref:`404-override` feature does change the Response status
  code to 404 by default. See :ref:`Upgrading Guide <upgrade-450-404-override>`.
- **system/bootstrap.php:** This file cannot be used. The code has been moved to
  the new ``CodeIgniter\Boot`` class.

Interface Changes
=================

.. note:: As long as you have not extended the relevant CodeIgniter core classes
    or implemented these interfaces, all these changes are backward compatible
    and require no intervention.

- **ResponseInterface:** The default value of the third parameter ``$expire`` of
  the ``ResponseInterface::setCookie()`` has been fixed from ``''`` to ``0``.
- **Logger:** The `psr/log <https://packagist.org/packages/psr/log>`_ package has
  been upgraded to v3.0.0.
- **Validation:** The method signature of ``ValidationInterface::run()`` has been
  changed. The ``?string`` typehint on the ``$dbGroup`` parameter was removed.

.. _v450-method-signature-changes:

Method Signature Changes
========================

Setting Cookies
---------------

The third parameter ``$expire`` in :php:func:`set_cookie()` and
:php:meth:`CodeIgniter\\HTTP\\Response::setCookie()` has been fixed.

The type has been changed from ``string`` to ``int``, and the default value has
been changed from ``''`` to  ``0``.

FileLocatorInterface
--------------------

- **Router:** The first parameter of the ``RouteCollection`` constructor has been changed
  from ``FileLocator`` to ``FileLocatorInterface``.
- **View:** The third parameter of the ``View`` constructor has been changed
  from ``FileLocator`` to ``FileLocatorInterface``.

Return Type Changes
-------------------

- **Model:** The return type of the ``objectToRawArray()`` method in the ``Model``
  and ``BaseModel`` classes has been changed from ``?array`` to ``array``.

Traditional Validation Rules
----------------------------

To add ``declare(strict_types=1)`` to the framework codebase, the method parameter
type ``?string`` for a value to validate in the all Traditional Validation rule
classes ``CodeIgniter\Validation\FormatRules`` and ``CodeIgniter\Validation\Rules``
are removed.

For example, the method signature changed as follows::

    Before: public function integer(?string $str = null): bool
    After:  public function integer($str = null): bool

Others
------

- **Logger:** The method signatures of the methods in ``CodeIgniter\Log\Logger``
  that implements the PSR-3 interface have been fixed. The ``bool`` return
  types are changed to ``void``. The ``$message`` parameters now have
  ``string|Stringable`` types.
- **Validation:** The method signature of ``Validation::run()`` has been
  changed. The ``?string`` typehint on the ``$dbGroup`` parameter was removed.

.. _v450-removed-deprecated-items:

Removed Deprecated Items
========================

Request
-------

- The ``$upper`` parameter in ``getMethod()`` in ``RequestInterface`` and ``Request``
  has been removed. See :ref:`upgrade-450-lowercase-http-method-name`.
- The deprecated ``isValidIP()`` method in ``RequestInterface`` and ``Request``
  has been removed.
- The visibility of the deprecated properties ``$uri`` and ``$config`` in
  ``IncomingRequest`` has been changed to protected.
- The ``$enableCSRF`` property in ``IncomingRequest`` has been removed.
- The ``removeRelativeDirectory()`` method in ``IncomingRequest`` has been removed.
- The ``$proxyIPs`` property in ``Request`` has been removed.

Filters
-------

- The following deprecated items have been removed, because now :ref:`multiple-filters` are always enabled.

    - ``Filters::enableFilter()``
    - ``RouteCollection::getFilterForRoute()``
    - ``Router::$filterInfo``
    - ``Router::getFilter()``

Database
--------

- ``ModelFactory``

Model
-----

- ``BaseModel::idValue()``
- ``BaseModel::fillPlaceholders()``
- ``Model::idValue()``
- ``Model::classToArray()``

Response
--------

- The visibility of the deprecated property ``ResponseTrait::$CSP`` has been
  changed to protected.
- The following deprecated properties have been removed.

    - ``ResponseTrait::$CSPEnabled``
    - ``ResponseTrait::$cookiePrefix``
    - ``ResponseTrait::$cookieDomain``
    - ``ResponseTrait::$cookiePath``
    - ``ResponseTrait::$cookieSecure``
    - ``ResponseTrait::$cookieHTTPOnly``
    - ``ResponseTrait::$cookieSameSite``
    - ``ResponseTrait::$cookies``

Security
--------

- ``SecurityInterface::isExpired()``
- ``Security::isExpired()``
- ``Security::CSRFVerify()``
- ``Security::getCSRFHash()``
- ``Security::getCSRFTokenName()``
- ``Security::sendCookie()``
- ``Security::doSendCookie()``

CodeIgniter
-----------

- ``$path``
- ``$useSafeOutput``
- ``useSafeOutput()``
- ``setPath()``

Test
----

- ``CIDatabaseTestCase``
- ``ControllerResponse``
- ``ControllerTester``
- ``FeatureResponse``
- ``FeatureTestCase``
- ``Mock\MockSecurityConfig``

Spark Commands
--------------

- ``migrate:create``
- ``session:migration``

Others
------

- **Cache:** The deprecated ``CodeIgniter\Cache\Exceptions\ExceptionInterface`` has been removed.
- **Config:**
    - The deprecated ``CodeIgniter\Config\Config`` class has been removed.
    - The deprecated ``CodeIgniter\Config\BaseService::discoverServices()`` method
      has been removed.
- **Controller:** The deprecated ``Controller::loadHelpers()`` method has been removed.
- **Exceptions:** The deprecated ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\CastException`` class has been removed.
- **Entity:** The deprecated ``CodeIgniter\Entity`` class has been removed. Use
  ``CodeIgniter\Entity\Entity`` instead.
- **spark:** The deprecated constant ``SPARKED`` has been removed.

***************
Message Changes
***************

- Added ``CLI.generator.className.test`` message.
- Added ``Validation.field_exists`` error message.

*******
Changes
*******

- **Bootstrap:** The loading of **.env** and defining ``ENVIRONMENT`` have been
  moved before loading of **bootstrap.php**.
- **Config:**
    - ``Config\Feature::$multipleFilters`` has been removed, because now
      :ref:`multiple-filters` are always enabled.
    - The default error level in the production environment
      (**app/Config/Boot/production.php**) has been changed to ``E_ALL & ~E_DEPRECATED``
      to match the default **php.ini** for production.
- **RouteCollection:** The HTTP method keys in the protected property ``$routes``
  has been fixed from lowercase to uppercase.
- **Exceptions:** Unused ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\AlertError`` and
  ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\EmergencyError`` were removed.
- **Forge:** ``SQLSRV`` Forge now converts ``ENUM`` data types to ``VARCHAR(n)``
  when you add table columns. In previous version, it converted to ``TEXT`` that
  is deprecated in SQL Server.
- ``declare(strict_types=1)`` has been added to most framework codebase.

************
Deprecations
************

- **Services:** The ``BaseService::$services`` property has been deprecated. No
  longer used.
- **CodeIgniter:**
    - The ``determinePath()`` method has been deprecated. No longer used.
    - The ``resolvePlatformExtensions()`` method has been deprecated. No longer
      used. It has been moved to the ``CodeIgniter\Boot::checkMissingExtensions()``
      method.
    - The ``bootstrapEnvironment()`` method has been deprecated. No longer used.
      It has been moved to the ``CodeIgniter\Boot::loadEnvironmentBootstrap()``
      method.
    - The ``initializeKint()`` method has been deprecated. No longer used. It has
      been moved to the ``Autoloader``.
    - The ``autoloadKint()`` method has been deprecated. No longer used. It has
      been moved to the ``Autoloader``.
    - The ``configureKint()`` method has been deprecated. No longer used. It has
      been moved to the ``Autoloader``.
- **Response:** The constructor parameter ``$config`` has been deprecated. No
  longer used.
- **Filters:**
    - The feature that ``Filters`` accept the lowercase HTTP method keys
      of ``Config\Filters::$methods`` has been deprecated. Use correct uppercase
      HTTP method keys instead.
    - The feature that the ``spark filter:check`` command accepts the lowercase
      HTTP method has been deprecated. Use correct uppercase HTTP method instead.
- **RouteCollection:** The feature that the ``match()`` and ``setHTTPVerb()``
  methods accept the lowercase HTTP methods has been deprecated. Use correct
  uppercase HTTP methods instead.
- **FeatureTestTrait:** The feature that the ``call()`` and ``withRoutes()``
  methods accept the lowercase HTTP methods has been deprecated. Use correct
  uppercase HTTP methods instead.
- **Database:** The ``BaseConnection::$strictOn`` has been deprecated. It will be
  moved to ``MySQLi\Connection`` in the future.

**********
Bugs Fixed
**********

See the repo's
`CHANGELOG.md <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a complete list of bugs fixed.
