#############
Version 4.6.0
#############

Release Date: January 19, 2025

**4.6.0 release of CodeIgniter4**

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3

********
BREAKING
********

Behavior Changes
================

.. _v460-behavior-changes-exceptions:

Exceptions
----------

The exception class has been redesigned. See :ref:`exception-design` for details.
The following breaking changes have been made accordingly:

- ``Validation::setRule()`` now throws ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\InvalidArgumentException``
  instead of ``TypeError``.
- ``CriticalError`` now extends ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\RuntimeException``
  instead of ``Error``.
- ``DatabaseException`` now extends ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\RuntimeException``
  instead of ``Error``.
- ``ConfigException`` now extends ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\RuntimeException``
  instead of ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\CriticalError``.
- ``TestException`` now extends ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\LogicException``
  instead of ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\CriticalError``.

Filters Changes
---------------

The ``Filters`` class has been changed to allow multiple runs of the same filter
with different arguments in before or after. See
:ref:`Upgrading Guide <upgrade-460-filters-changes>` for details.

Registrars
----------

Added check to prevent Auto-Discovery of Registrars from running twice. If it is
executed twice, an exception will be thrown. See
:ref:`upgrade-460-registrars-with-dirty-hack`.

Time::createFromTimestamp()
---------------------------

``Time::createFromTimestamp()`` handles timezones differently. If ``$timezone``
is not explicitly passed then the instance has timezone set to UTC unlike earlier
where the currently set default timezone was used.
See :ref:`Upgrading Guide <upgrade-460-time-create-from-timestamp>` for details.

Time with Microseconds
----------------------

Fixed bugs that some methods in ``Time`` to lose microseconds have been fixed.
See :ref:`Upgrading Guide <upgrade-460-time-keeps-microseconds>` for details.

Time::setTimestamp()
--------------------

``Time::setTimestamp()`` behavior has been fixed.
See :ref:`Upgrading Guide <upgrade-460-time-set-timestamp>` for details.

Error Reporting to Non-HTML Requests
------------------------------------

In previous versions, when a request does not accept HTML, CodeIgniter showed
error details only in the ``development`` and ``testing`` environments.

But because it is not possible to display error details when using a custom
environment, this behavior has been fixed so that error details are displayed if
``display_errors`` in PHP ini setting is enabled.

With this fix, the error details are now displayed under the same conditions for
both HTML requests and non-HTML requests.

Session ID (SID)
----------------

Now ``Session`` library forces to use the PHP default 32 character SIDs, with 4
bits of entropy per character.
See :ref:`Upgrading Guide <upgrade-460-sid-change>` for details.

.. _v460-interface-changes:

Headers
-------

The headers set by the ``Response`` class replace those that can be set by the PHP
``header()`` function.

In previous versions, headers set by the ``Response`` class were added to existing
ones - giving no options to change them. That could lead to unexpected behavior when
the same headers were set with mutually exclusive directives.

For example, session will automatically set headers with the ``header()`` function:

.. code-block:: none

    Expires: Thu, 19 Nov 1981 08:52:00 GMT
    Cache-Control: no-store, no-cache, must-revalidate
    Pragma: no-cache

So if we set **Expires** header one more time we will end up with a duplicated header:

.. code-block:: php

    $response->removeHeader('Expires'); // has no effect
    return $response->setHeader('Expires', 'Sun, 17 Nov 2024 14:17:37 GMT');

Response headers:

.. code-block:: none

    Expires: Thu, 19 Nov 1981 08:52:00 GMT
    // ...
    Expires: Sun, 17 Nov 2024 14:17:37 GMT

Now, we don't know which one will be picked by the browser or which header is the correct one.
With changes in this version our previous header will be overridden:

.. code-block:: none

    Cache-Control: no-store, no-cache, must-revalidate
    Pragma: no-cache
    Expires: Sun, 17 Nov 2024 14:17:37 GMT

Interface Changes
=================

.. note:: As long as you have not extended the relevant CodeIgniter core classes
    or implemented these interfaces, all these changes are backward compatible
    and require no intervention.

- **Router:** The following methods have been added in ``RouteCollectionInterface``:

    - ``getDefaultNamespace()``
    - ``getRoutesOptions()``
    - ``setHTTPVerb()``
    - ``isFiltered()``
    - ``getFiltersForRoute()``

.. _v460-method-signature-changes:

Method Signature Changes
========================

- **Router:** The constructor of the ``DefinedRouteCollector`` has been
  changed. The ``RouteCollection`` typehint has been changed to ``RouteCollectionInterface``.
- **View:** The return type of the ``renderSection()`` method has been
  changed to ``string``, and now the method does not call ``echo``.
- **Time:** The first parameter type of the ``createFromTimestamp()`` has been
  changed from ``int`` to ``int|float``, and the return type ``static`` has been
  added.
- **Helpers:** ``character_limiter()`` parameter names have been updated. If you use named arguments, you need to update the function calls.

Removed Type Definitions
------------------------

- **Database:**
    - The type ``string`` of the first parameter in
      ``BaseConnection::escapeIdentifier()`` has been removed.
    - The type ``string`` of the first parameter in
      ``BaseConnection::getFieldNames()`` and ``SQLite3\Connection::getFieldNames()``
      have been removed.
    - The type ``string`` of the first parameter in
      ``BaseConnection::_listColumns()`` and ``MySQLi\Connection::_listColumns()``
      and ``OCI8\Connection::_listColumns()``
      and ``Postgre\Connection::_listColumns()``
      and ``SQLSRV\Connection::_listColumns()``
      and ``SQLite3\Connection::_listColumns()`` have been removed.

.. _v460-removed-deprecated-items:

Removed Deprecated Items
========================

- **API:** The deprecated ``failValidationError()`` method in ``CodeIgniter\API\ResponseTrait``
  has been removed. Use ``failValidationErrors()`` instead.
- **HTTP:** The deprecated ``getReason()`` method in ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\Response``
  and ``ResponseInterface`` has been removed. Use ``getReasonPhrase()`` instead.
- **Logger:** The deprecated ``CodeIgniter\Log\Logger::cleanFilenames()`` and
  ``CodeIgniter\Test\TestLogger::cleanup()`` have been removed. Use the
  ``clean_path()`` function instead.
- **Router:** The deprecated ``CodeIgniter\Router\Exceptions\RedirectException`` has been removed. Use ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\Exceptions\RedirectException`` instead.
- **Constants:** The deprecated constants ``EVENT_PRIORITY_*`` in has been removed. Use the class constants ``CodeIgniter\Events\Events::PRIORITY_LOW``, ``CodeIgniter\Events\Events::PRIORITY_NORMAL`` and ``CodeIgniter\Events\Events::PRIORITY_HIGH`` instead.
- **View:** The deprecated property ``CodeIgniter\View\View::$currentSection`` has been removed.
- **Config:** The deprecated property ``Config\Cache::$storePath`` has been removed. Use ``Config\Cache::$file['storePath']`` instead.
- **Formatter:** The deprecated ``Config\Format::getFormatter()`` has been removed. Use ``CodeIgniter\Format\Format::getFormatter()`` instead.
- **Security:** ``Config\Security::$samesite`` has been removed. Use ``Config\Cookie::$samesite`` instead.
- **Cookie:** Methods ``dispatch()``, ``setRawCookie()``, ``setCookie()`` in ``CodeIgniter\Cookie\CookieStore`` has been removed. They are now part of ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\ResponseTrait``.

************
Enhancements
************

Publisher
=========

- ``Publisher::discover()`` now accepts a second parameter (``namespace``) specifying the namespace in which publishers should be searched. See :ref:`discovery-in-a-specific-namespace` for the details.

Exceptions
==========

The exception class has been redesigned. See :ref:`exception-design` for details.
The following new Exception classes have been added accordingly:

- ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\LogicException``
- ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\RuntimeException``
- ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\BadFunctionCallException``
- ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\BadMethodCallException``
- ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\InvalidArgumentException``

The following new Exception interfaces have been added:

- ``CodeIgniter\Files\Exceptions\ExceptionInterface``
- ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\Exceptions\ExceptionInterface``
- ``CodeIgniter\Router\Exceptions\ExceptionInterface``

Displaying exceptions for non-HTML responses now rely on the PHP ``display_errors`` setting instead of hardcoded environments.

Commands
========

- The ``spark routes`` and ``spark filter:check`` commands now display filter
  arguments.
- The ``spark filter:check`` command now displays filter classnames.
- The ``spark lang:sync`` command to synchronize translation files. See :ref:`sync-translations-command`
- The ``spark phpini:check`` command now has an optional ``opcache`` argument,
  which when used will display information about opcache settings.

Routing
=======

- Now you can specify multiple hostnames when restricting routes.

Negotiator
==========

- Added a feature flag ``Feature::$strictLocaleNegotiation`` to enable strict locale comparision.
  Previously, response with language headers ``Accept-language: en-US,en-GB;q=0.9`` returned the first allowed language ``en`` could instead of the exact language ``en-US`` or ``en-GB``.
  Set the value to ``true`` to enable comparison not only by language code ('en' - ISO 639-1) but also by regional code ('en-US' - ISO 639-1 plus ISO 3166-1 alpha).

Pagination
==========

- Added a new feature to get the total and the range number of items of the current page.
  See :ref:`Displaying the Number of Items on the Page <displaying-the-number-of-items-on-the-page>` for more details.

Database
========

Others
------

- Added a new configuration ``foundRows`` for MySQLi to use ``MYSQLI_CLIENT_FOUND_ROWS``.
- Added the ``BaseConnection::resetTransStatus()`` method to reset the transaction
  status. See :ref:`transactions-resetting-transaction-status` for details.
- SQLite3 has a new Config item ``synchronous`` to adjust how strict SQLite is at flushing
  to disk during transactions. Modifying this can be useful if we use journal mode set to ``WAL``.

Libraries
=========

- **File:** Added ``getSizeByBinaryUnit()`` and ``getSizeByMetricUnit()`` to ``File`` class.
  See :ref:`File::getSizeByBinaryUnit() <file-get-size-by-binary-unit>` and :ref:`File::getSizeByMetricUnit() <file-get-size-by-metric-unit>`.
- **FileCollection:** Added ``retainMultiplePatterns()`` to ``FileCollection`` class.
  See :ref:`FileCollection::retainMultiplePatterns() <file-collections-retain-multiple-patterns>`.
- **Validation:** Added ``min_dims`` validation rule to ``FileRules`` class. See
  :ref:`Validation <rules-for-file-uploads>`.
- **Validation:** Rules: ``is_unique`` and ``is_not_unique`` now accept the optional
  ``dbGroup`` as part of the first parameter. See :ref:`Validation <rules-for-general-use>`.

Others
======

- **Filters:** Now you can execute a filter more than once with the different
  arguments in before or after.
- **Services:** Added ``BaseService::resetServicesCache()`` method to reset
  the services cache. See :ref:`resetting-services-cache`.
- **Errors:** Added a default error page for "400 Bad Request".

***************
Message Changes
***************

- Added ``Validation.min_dims`` message
- Added ``Errors.badRequest`` and ``Errors.sorryBadRequest``

*******
Changes
*******

Exceptions
==========

The exception classes have been redesigned. See :ref:`exception-design` for details.
The following changes have been made accordingly:

- The ``deleteMatching()`` method in Cache Handler classes now throws
  ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\BadMethodCallException`` instead of ``Exception``.
- ``Cache\ResponseCache::get()`` now throws ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\RuntimeException``
  instead of ``Exception``.
- Classes that threw ``RuntimeException`` have been changed to throw
  ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\RuntimeException``.
- Classes that threw ``InvalidArgumentException`` have been changed to throw
  ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\InvalidArgumentException``.
- Classes that threw ``LogicException`` have been changed to throw
  ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\LogicException``.
- Classes that threw ``BadMethodCallException`` have been changed to throw
  ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\BadMethodCallException``.
- Classes that threw ``BadFunctionCallException`` have been changed to throw
  ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\BadFunctionCallException``.
- ``RedirectException`` now extends ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\RuntimeException``
  instead of ``Exception``.
- ``PageNotFoundException`` now extends ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\RuntimeException``
  instead of ``OutOfBoundsException``.

************
Deprecations
************

- **Filters:**
    - The properties ``$arguments`` and ``$argumentsClass`` of ``Filters`` have
      been deprecated. No longer used.
    - The ``Filters::getArguments()`` method has been deprecated. No longer used.
- **File:**
    - The function ``getSizeByUnit()`` of ``File`` has been deprecated.
      Use either ``getSizeByBinaryUnit()`` or ``getSizeByMetricUnit()`` instead.

**********
Bugs Fixed
**********

- **Response:**
    - Headers set using the ``Response`` class are now prioritized and replace headers
      that can be set manually using the PHP ``header()`` function.
- **View:** Added support for multibyte strings for ``View::excerpt()``.
- **Helpers:** Added support for multibyte strings for ``excerpt()``.

See the repo's
`CHANGELOG.md <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a complete list of bugs fixed.
