#############
Version 4.6.1
#############

Release Date: May 2, 2025

**4.6.1 release of CodeIgniter4**

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3

*******
Changes
*******
- **Mimes**: Added the ``model/stl`` and ``application/octet-stream`` mime types for the ``stl`` extension inside the ``Config\Mimes`` class.

************
Deprecations
************

- **Cache:** The ``FileHandler::writeFile()`` method is deprecated. Use ``write_file()`` instead.
- **Cache:** The ``FileHandler::deleteFiles()`` method is deprecated. Use ``delete_files()`` instead.
- **Cache:** The ``FileHandler::getDirFileInfo()`` method is deprecated. Use ``get_dir_file_info()`` instead.
- **Cache:** The ``FileHandler::getFileInfo()`` method is deprecated. Use ``get_file_info()`` instead.

**********
Bugs Fixed
**********

- **CURLRequest:** Fixed an issue where multiple header sections appeared in the CURL response body during multiple redirects from the target server.
- **Cors:** Fixed a bug in the Cors filter that caused the appropriate headers to not be added when another filter returned a response object in the ``before`` filter.
- **Database:** Fixed a bug in ``Postgre`` and ``SQLite3`` handlers where composite unique keys were not fully taken into account for ``upsert`` type of queries.
- **Database:** Fixed a bug in the ``OCI8`` and ``SQLSRV`` drivers where ``getVersion()`` returned an empty string when the database connection was not yet established.
- **Logger:** Fixed a bug where the ``{line}`` variable couldn't be used without specifying the ``{file}`` variable when logging the message.
- **Session:** Fixed a bug where ``Session::markAsTempdata()`` would give the wrong TTL when array data is supplied to ``Session::setTempdata()``.
- **Toolbar:** Fixed a bug where setting ``maxHistory`` to ``0`` would produce a JavaScript error in the Debug Toolbar.
- **Toolbar:** Fixed a bug where setting ``maxHistory`` to ``0`` prevented log files from being properly cleared.

See the repo's
`CHANGELOG.md <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a complete list of bugs fixed.
