#############
Version 4.6.2
#############

Release Date: July 26, 2025

**4.6.2 release of CodeIgniter4**

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3

********
SECURITY
********

- **ImageMagick Handler:** *Command Injection Vulnerability in ImageMagick Handler* was fixed.
  See the `Security advisory GHSA-9952-gv64-x94c <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/security/advisories/GHSA-9952-gv64-x94c>`_
  for more information.

*******
Changes
*******

- **Security:** The ``sanitize_filename()`` function from the Security helper now supports a second parameter to control whether relative paths are allowed.

************
Deprecations
************

- **Security:** The ``Security::sanitizeFilename()`` method is deprecated. Use ``sanitize_filename()`` instead.
- **Security:** The ``SecurityInterface::sanitizeFilename()`` method is deprecated.

**********
Bugs Fixed
**********

- **Cache:** Fixed a bug where a corrupted or unreadable cache file could cause an unhandled exception in ``FileHandler::getItem()``.
- **Commands:** Fixed a bug in ``make:test`` where it would always error on Windows.
- **Commands:** Fixed a bug in ``make:test`` where the generated test file would not end with ``Test.php``.
- **Commands:** Fixed a bug in ``make:test`` where input prompt would display for three times after not entering a class name.
- **CURLRequest:** Fixed a bug where intermediate HTTP responses were not properly removed from the response chain in certain scenarios, causing incorrect status codes and headers to be returned instead of the final response.
- **Database:** Fixed a bug where ``when()`` and ``whenNot()`` in ``ConditionalTrait`` incorrectly evaluated certain falsy values (such as ``[]``, ``0``, ``0.0``, and ``'0'``) as truthy, causing callbacks to be executed unexpectedly. These methods now cast the condition to a boolean using ``(bool)`` to ensure consistent behavior with PHP's native truthiness.
- **Database:** Fixed encapsulation violation in ``BasePreparedQuery`` when accessing ``BaseConnection::transStatus`` protected property.
- **DownloadResponse:** Fixed a bug where ``filename`` parameters were missing from ``Content-Disposition`` headers when using inline disposition, causing browsers to use the last URL segment for filenames instead of the intended filename.
- **Email:** Fixed a bug where ``Email::getHostname()`` failed to use ``$_SERVER['SERVER_ADDR']`` when ``$_SERVER['SERVER_NAME']`` was not set.
- **Security:** Fixed a bug where the ``sanitize_filename()`` function from the Security helper would throw an error when used in CLI requests.
- **Session:** Fixed a bug where using the ``DatabaseHandler`` with an unsupported database driver (such as ``SQLSRV``, ``OCI8``, or ``SQLite3``) did not throw an appropriate error.
- **SiteURI:** Fixed a bug in ``SiteURIFactory::parseRequestURI()`` where serving the app from a subfolder using ``mod_rewrite`` while preserving the ``index.php`` file would cause incorrect route path detection.
- **SiteURI:** Fixed a bug in ``SiteURIFactory::parseRequestURI()`` where folder names containing multibyte (non-ASCII) characters were not correctly resolved when the application was served from a subfolder.
- **URI:** Fixed a bug in ``URI::getAuthority()`` where schemes without defined default ports (like ``rtsp://``) would cause issues due to missing array key handling.

See the repo's
`CHANGELOG.md <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a complete list of bugs fixed.
